Add doc page for 'istioctl analyze' (#5147)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ops/troubleshooting/istioctl-analyze/index.md

---
title: Analyze your cluster and local configuration with istioctl analyze
description: Shows you how to use istioctl analyze to identify potential issues with your configuration.
weight: 90
keywords: [istioctl, debugging, kubernetes]
---

{{< boilerplate experimental-feature-warning >}}

> ## Getting started in under a minute

Reviewer: Before Getting Started, I think you need an intro paragraph or two explaining what this is about in higher level terms.

> `Istioctl analyze` is a powerful Istio diagnostic command that you can get started with in no time, and on any cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`istioctl analyze` is a powerful Istio diagnostic command that you can get started with in no time, and on any cluster.
```

> First, download the latest `istioctl` into the current folder using one bash command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using Istio 1.3 or earlier, you'll first need to download a newer version of `istioctl`:
```

Author: We actually would prefer users to always download very latest as analysers . I added a comment to explain that.

> Mac:

Reviewer: Use a tabset here. Search for `tabset` for example usage.

{{< text bash >}}
$ curl https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/latest | xargs -I {} curl https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/{}/istioctl-{}-osx.tar.gz | tar xvz
{{< /text >}}

Linux:

{{< text bash >}}
$ curl https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/latest | xargs -I {} curl https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/{}/istioctl-{}-linux.tar.gz | tar xvz
{{< /text >}}

Then, run it against your current Kubernetes cluster:

{{< text bash >}}
$ ./istioctl x analyze -k
{{< /text >}}

And that’s it! It’ll give you any recommendations that apply.

For example, if you forgot to enable Istio injection (very common issue), you would get the following warning:

{{< text plain >}}
Warn [IST0102](Namespace/default) The namespace is not enabled for Istio injection. Run 'kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=enabled' to enable it, or 'kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=disabled' to explicitly mark it as not needing injection
{{< /text >}}

> Notes: the ‘x’ in the command is because it’s currently ‘eXperimental’. It will eventually just be `istioctl analyze`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that ‘x’ in the command is because this is currently an experimental feature.
```

## Analyzing live clusters, local files, or both

The scenario in the ‘getting started’ section is doing analysis on live cluster. But the tool also supports performing analysis of a set of local yaml configuration files, or on a combination of local files and a live cluster.

> {{< text bash >}}

Reviewer: Separate this into distinct `<text>` blocks. People should be able to click the Copy button and paste into their terminal, which wouldn't work with this combo approach.

$
# Analyze a specific set of local files
$ ./istioctl x analyze a.yaml b.yaml

# Analyze all yaml files in the current folder
$ ./istioctl x analyze *.yaml

# Analyze the current live cluster, simulating the effect of applying additional yaml files
$ ./istioctl x analyze -k a.yaml b.yaml
{{< /text >}}

You can run `./istioctl x analyze --help` to see the full set of options.

> ## Helping us make improve this tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Helping us improve this tool
```

> ## Helping us make improve this tool

Reviewer: I think we need a section called "Running analysis in your CI environment" that suggests users run this tool in their CI pipeline, and in general run this tool before committing any config changes to their cluster.

Author: Agreed, and @selmanj is going to look at that scenario, but right now I don't want to block the initial doc on not having that.

> This tool works by running a set of analyzers that can each detect a certain set of problems. While we’re working hard to expand the list of analyzers, we don’t necessarily have awareness of all the areas of Istio that can benefit from it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're constantly adding more analysis capability and we'd love your help in identifying more use cases. If you've discovered some Istio configuration "gotcha", some tricky situation that caused you some problems, open an issue and let us know. We might be able to automatically flag this problem so that others can discover and avoid the problem in the first place.
```

> This is where you come in! If you know of a scenario that could be automatically detected by looking at the cluster configuration, we should write an analyzer for it.

Reviewer: Given my update, I think this paragraph can go.

There are two ways you can help us.

> ### The easy way: just describe the scenario to us

Reviewer: Use a numbered list here instead of headings.

> Just open an issue [on the Istio repo](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues) describing your scenario. E.g. something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Open an issue](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues) describing your scenario. For example:
```

- Look at all the virtual services
- For each, look at their list of gateways
- If some of the gateways don’t exist, produce an error

We already have an analyzer for this specific scenario, so this is just an example to illustrate what we’re looking at.

> ### The harder (but more rewarding!) way: send a PR for a new analyzer

Reviewer: I don't think we want to mention this. istio.io is about customers, not developers. Just have them file an issue, if their developers they'll figure out that they can write the analysis themselves.

You should still start with a GitHub issue as above, but then you can look into writing the new analyzer yourself!

Please head over to [this page]({{<github_blob>}}/galley/pkg/config/analysis/README.md) to get started.

## Q&A

> ### What Istio version does this tool target?

Reviewer: Make these bulleted items instead of using headers.

Reviewer: Here and elsewhere, replace "Istio version" with "Istio release"

Author: @geeknoid not sure how to get the right formatting with a bulleted list. That doesn't allow whitespace within one bullet.

> One great thing about it is that it works with any version of Istio, and doesn’t require anything to be installed in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Analysis works with any version of Istio, and doesn’t require anything to be installed in the cluster. You just need to get a recent version of `istioctl`.
```

In some cases, some of the analyzers will not apply if they are not meaningful with your Istio version. But the analysis will still happen with all analyzers that do apply.

> Note that while the analyze command works across Istio versions, that is not the case for all other `istioctl` commands. So it is suggested that you download the latest version of `istioctl` in a separate folder for analysis purpose, while you use the one that came with your specific Istio version to run other commands.

Reviewer: `analyze`

### What analyzers are supported today?

> We need to better document the list, but until then you can see all the analyzers in the Istio sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're still working to documenting the analyzers. In the meantime, you can see all the analyzers in the [Istio source](URL).
```

> ### Can it do anything bad to my cluster?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Can analysis do anything bad to my cluster?
```

> The tool only retrieves the Istio/Kubernetes configuration, so it is completely read-only and will never affect the state of a cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Analysis never changes configuration state, it is a completely read-only operation and so will never alter the state of a cluster.
```

### What about analysis that goes beyond configuration?

> Today, the analysis is purely based on Kubernetes configuration. In the future, we’d like to expand beyond that. E.g. We could allow analyzers to also look at logs to generate recommendations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, the analysis is purely based on Kubernetes configuration, but in the future we’d like to expand beyond that. For example, we could allow analyzers to also look at logs to generate recommendations.
```

---
title: Analyze your cluster and local configuration with istioctl analyze
description: Shows you how to use istioctl analyze to identify potential issues with your configuration.
weight: 90
keywords: [istioctl, debugging, kubernetes]
---

{{< boilerplate experimental-feature-warning >}}

`istioctl analyze` is a powerful Istio diagnostic tool that can detect potential issues with your
Istio configuration. It can run against a live cluster or a set of local configuration files.
It can also run against a combination of the two, allowing you to catch problems before you
apply changes to a cluster.

## Getting started in under a minute

Getting started is very simple. First, download the latest `istioctl` into the current folder

> using one bash command (downloading the latest version ensure that it will have the most

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using one command (downloading the latest version ensure that it will have the most
```

complete set of analyzers):

{{< tabset cookie-name="platform" >}}

> {{< tab name="macOS" cookie-value="macos" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< tab name="Mac" cookie-value="macos" >}}
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ curl https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/latest | xargs -I {} curl https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/{}/istioctl-{}-osx.tar.gz | tar xvz
{{< /text >}}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab name="Linux" cookie-value="linux" >}}

{{< text bash >}}
$ curl https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/latest | xargs -I {} curl https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/{}/istioctl-{}-linux.tar.gz | tar xvz
{{< /text >}}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabset >}}

Then, run it against your current Kubernetes cluster:

{{< text bash >}}
$ ./istioctl x analyze -k
{{< /text >}}

And that’s it! It’ll give you any recommendations that apply.

> For example, if you forgot to enable Istio injection (very common issue), you would get the following warning:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you forgot to enable Istio injection (a very common issue), you would get the following warning:
```

{{< text plain >}}
Warn [IST0102](Namespace/default) The namespace is not enabled for Istio injection. Run 'kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=enabled' to enable it, or 'kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=disabled' to explicitly mark it as not needing injection
{{< /text >}}

> Note that ‘x’ in the command is because this is currently an experimental feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that `x` in the command is because this is currently an experimental feature.
```

## Analyzing live clusters, local files, or both

> The scenario in the ‘getting started’ section is doing analysis on live cluster. But the tool also supports performing analysis of a set of local yaml configuration files, or on a combination of local files and a live cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scenario in the ‘getting started’ section is doing analysis on live clusters. But the tool also supports performing analysis of a set of local yaml configuration files, or on a combination of local files and a live cluster.
```
